Gracias a Greg y Mike por organizar esta increíble serie de charlas.
Muchas de las cosas que voy a tocar durante los próximos 10 minutos ya se han mencionado en algunas de las charlas anteriores y me gustaría tener más tiempo para tal vez crear más enlaces a las ideas anteriores que se compartieron, pero en los próximos nueve a diez minutos voy a discutir por qué la productividad de los desarrolladores es más complicada de lo que podemos pensar y por qué la medición de la productividad puede ser contraproducente, y también voy a tratar de convencerte de que debemos centrarnos y prestar más atención a la mejora y la comprensión de la experiencia de los desarrolladores, algo que ya hemos oído hoy varias veces, y por qué hacerlo puede mejorar el espacio de la productividad en general.

Pero primero hablemos de productividad.
Si quieres convertir una reunión aburrida con desarrolladores de software y sus gerentes en una emocionante, sólo tienes que sacar a colación el concepto de productividad de los desarrolladores y sugerir cómo debería medirse.
Y descubrirás que las personas presentes en la sala tienen puntos de vista muy diferentes sobre lo que significa la productividad para ellos y sobre cómo debería medirse la productividad, si es que se mide.
Y también podemos escuchar que, en esas reuniones, los líderes y gerentes de las empresas de software se preocupan por la productividad porque suponen que si tienen una mayor productividad de los desarrolladores, eso les ayudará a ofrecer valor a sus clientes más rápidamente.
Y los desarrolladores se preocupan por la productividad porque tener impacto y sentir que su trabajo aporta valor les hará más felices.
Pero, ¿qué significa realmente la productividad de los desarrolladores para los directivos y los desarrolladores?
Pues resulta que, junto con mis colegas Brian y Tom de Microsoft, hemos preguntado a directivos y desarrolladores cómo definen la productividad mediante una encuesta abierta.

Y escuchamos definiciones muy variadas.
De hecho, los directivos son más propensos a hablar de la productividad en términos de resultados de rendimiento, pero muchos de ellos también nos dieron definiciones ricas de productividad que no se limitaban a mantener a sus clientes contentos, sino que también incluían el bienestar de sus desarrolladores y la construcción de una cultura de trabajo positiva.
Los desarrolladores también nos dieron definiciones muy variadas, pero ellos -en comparación con sus directivos- eran más propensos a definir la productividad en términos de resultados de la actividad y del tiempo que pueden pasar haciendo su trabajo sin interrupciones y en un estado de flujo.
Sin embargo, muchos desarrolladores también compartieron que la productividad no se limitaba a la actividad y el flujo, sino que también se refería al impacto de su trabajo: ayudar a los demás y aprender para el futuro.


So defining productivity is important but leaders - and I would say even some developers - want to be able to measure productivity so that they can understand the impact changes in tools, processes, and goals may have.
And we saw this of course especially during the past two years of work from home and the recent call for hybrid work.
And in fact early attempts to understand productivity in terms of telemetry data such as number of pull requests and even through surveying developers gave us the early impression that productivity had potentially improved or stayed the same.
But of course it wasn't quite that simple.
So as we and others discovered when we surveyed developers in the first few months of the pandemic many reported higher perceived productivity but at the cost of potential burnout, while others were struggling to work at all.
And we also learned that teamwork was more challenging and that interruptions and in fact the nature of these interruptions had increased.
But how to make sense of all of this research?
So there were a bunch of us studying productivity during the pandemic and we recognized that we needed a better way to frame developer productivity.
So building on years of research, not just the research we did, we developed the SPACE framework that synthesizes the main five dimensions of productivity that we saw emerging from the various studies of developer productivity.
And SPACE helps us articulate that developer productivity doesn't just come down to speed or output and that there are many different aspects of productivity that we need to consider.
Let me talk about these five dimensions a little bit in more detail.
The first dimension satisfaction and well-being, looks at how fulfilled and happy developers are.
Our earlier research shows that satisfaction and perceived productivity, although not quite the same, they are correlated, and it's crucial to look at how developers feel in order to get a holistic understanding of their productivity.
This is something that is often measured through surveys to gain the subjective data.
The next dimension of the SPACE framework is performance.
This refers to the outcomes of a system or process, and it is the aspect of productivity that many leaders care about the most.
And you might think well evaluating performance is easy, but actually even though there are some objective measures there are very many variables that we need to consider.
So for example a lot of code doesn't necessarily mean it's high quality, and high quality code doesn't necessarily mean happy customers, and even happy customers doesn't necessarily mean more revenue for a company.
The third dimension we added to SPACE is activity and outputs.
Of course this is an important metric to look at and it's one developers may often think about first, but as we've been alluding to so far in this talk it's not the be-all and end-all of productivity.
And in fact the activities developers perform are also complex and diverse, and we may be able to measure some, so for example pull requests or number of code reviews, but other activities, such as attending meetings, are helping other developers that are onboarding or learning for the future.
These things are hard to put into into numbers.
The next dimension in SPACE is about communication and collaboration, something we've heard a lot about today as well.
This dimension emphasizes that software development is a team activity and an inherently creative and collaborative process.
And then the final dimension that we added to the SPACE framework is about efficiency and flow.
Efficiency and flow is the ability to work without interruption.
These are topics that have been studied extensively in our research community over the past few years years, and this dimension captures the importance of flow for individual developers and the negative impact interruptions may have on their work.
But this dimension also captures how well teams are orchestrating their different activities and how often they're making continuous progress.
So SPACE gives us a much richer and a more nuanced way to think about productivity but can it help us measure productivity, something leaders as I mentioned in particular care about.
Fortunately these days it is now recognized that there is no universal metric for measuring productivity, and SPACE can help us and plays a role here in helping us choose at least several metrics from different dimensions of productivity, and actually our paper describes this in a bit more detail.
But we're not done: choosing these metrics is still challenging and I believe that we need to do a lot more to understand how to measure different aspects of productivity or otherwise we run the risk of being counterproductive.
This is especially important to be cautious about because, well, let's face it, engineers have been trained and conditioned to consider objective data and metrics that are easier to quantify before considering qualitative and subjective data, so before choosing metrics we need to first pause, take a step back, and focus on what are the goals, that is, are we trying to measure productivity in terms of improving the quality of the product, or are we trying to improve quality productivity in terms of the velocity of our engineering process and being able to continuously deliver code, or are we looking at the experience of the developer or perhaps it's all three.
Now for product quality and process quality we do already have some well-defined objective and validated quantitative metrics for these, but as I mentioned earlier, even these - measuring these is not simple, and they need to be - we need to carefully consider the context of the project and the developers before choosing these metrics.
The third one here, developer experience, in contrast relies much more on subjective metrics which can be harder to measure, but I'm proposing today that it is critical that we understand and improve developer experience, because we know from previous research that improving developer experience will lead to improvements in product quality and process velocity and vice versa.
But what do I mean when I say developer experience, you may wonder.
It is also complicated.
From a study I recently did with my colleagues Michaela and Abi, we define developer experience as how developers think about, feel about, and value their work.
And in this study we conducted in-depth interviews with 21 developers from across the industry to understand which factors have the most impact on their experience.
And we learned about key six factors - six key categories of factors: developer flow and fulfillment, how they collaborate with others and their culture at work, how their team and their product is managed, and the quality of the tools and the engineering processes they use.
But we also found that the impact these different factors have really depends on their specific context of the project and on their work.
And these factors can help us pick specific goals and in turn metrics that can improve developer experience and in turn developer productivity overall.
So in closing here are my main takeaways.
Productivity is more complicated than we think.
It means different things to different people and there is no universal productivity metric or even a universal set of metrics.
Space can help us select some metrics but first we need to clearly articulate our goals before selecting any.
And lastly we need I suggest that as an industry we need to place a lot more focus on understanding and improving developer experience, as doing so will lead to improvements in product quality and engineering velocity, all important goals within the space of productivity.
So thank you and I hope that you some of you might reach out to me by email or twitter if you have questions or thoughts to share and I would love to hear from you.
