Thank you very much for this introduction, Greg, it's a great pleasure for me to be here.
And the person you see on my slide is Masako Wakamiya,
she is an app developer.
She was born in 1935 and built her very first app when she was 82.
And on the right you see this app it's called Hinedan and for a Japanese members in the audience I need to apologize for my pronunciation,
but this is essentially a game which is training kids to prepare an altar for a girls' festival called Hinamatsuri.
And you need to put those dolls in the right places.
So she is of course exceptional,
but there are quite some older software developers who are around,
and previous studies have shown that the programmer reputation scores on Stack Overflow tends to increase well into the 50s,
and there is no strong correlation between age and scores and specific knowledge areas.
So this is what - essentially suggests that older software developers should thrive in our world.
But at the same time Quora is full of questions.
I am so many years and am I too old to become a programmer?
And those questions are coming from people who are 50, who are 60, but also people who are 15.
So what is going on?
We try to understand together with Sebastian Valdes and George Park,
how exactly this public discourse surrounding age and software developers is organized?
What are people talking about and what kind of things they associate with being old in software development?
So we have analyzed articles,
so essentially we have looked at the top 100 hits,
we looked at Google "age and software developer",
we focused on English-based sources and US-based locations,
because of course age-related expectations are culturally determined.
We excluded things which are merely job ads and collections of statistics
and we found 24 articles published on news sites,
published on popular blog platform, CDC, a couple of those examples,
and we have manually analyzed those texts.
So the first question for us was,
how old is actually old?
And here I have bad news for many of us, including myself.
So I'm old:
I have passed the boundary of 40,
so I am considered to be old.
And if you see that - even if the upper boundary from this table, like 50 or older,
is by far nowhere near to the retirement age in the western cultures.
Some documents even refer to people in their 30s as being old.
So essentially old is very young in software development.
So when we looked closer at what those articles are essentially talking about
then it turned out that employability is a major concern.
People are worried about their ability to continue their professional careers,
to find new jobs,
and so on.
And we have cross-checked those articles with more popular opinions on Hacker News.
So what we have found is that there are many strategies which are being recommended both for companies and for individuals
when it comes to ensuring their employer - employability of older software developers.
For example,
companies can offer returnships which are often being mentioned in context of parental leaves,
but essentially can be used for any kind of extended career breaks.
Or provide career tracks and KPIs which would be tailored towards experienced developers.
At the same time companies should stop doing certain things which are negatively affecting all the developers.
For example,
if you are asking at the in - as part of your interview process to solve classical puzzles from the algorithms book
or from the data structures book from a first-year university education
then of course you are going to disadvantage people who might not have followed the traditional path
or might not might have just followed those traditional paths many, many years ago,
which was of course the case for people we've been focusing on.
Framing technological experience as technology baggage is discouraging and worrisome.
At the level of the individuals,
we see that these people are trying to grow as software engineers,
for example by mastering modern technologies or developing mentorship skills or becoming - and getting knowledge of specific niche technologies,
but those techniques can be seen as problematic
because even if your technology knowledge is being appreciated,
it's - the social context might be a problem pushing some of the older individuals to adopt strategies which are aiming at appearing young.
For example modifying CV by hiding some of the previous employment,
working overtime which is mostly associated - not adopted for people having other obligations,
or even going to plastic surgeons.
So based on the study,
we have seen techniques that both companies and individuals can employ to encourage or discourage all the software developers from continuous -
from being employed in companies.
In a follow-up study we have looked at more specific subgroup of all the developers,
specifically at women.
Remember Masako Wakamiya?
She was in her 80s,
she was developing an app.
We know from the literature and from our own experience that women are a minoritized group in software development,
and as our previous study has shown,
so are older developers.
And in general people who are on the intersection of multiple diversity axes
tend to experience challenges which cannot be attributed to a single one of them.
So this is why we have conducted a series of interview studies.
So you see here a general overview of the experiences of older women,
and again older in this case means 40 plus,
the strategies they use to survive,
and their general perceptions.
So this is of course a full-blown paper and today I would like to focus solely on strategies
because I would like to be it as practical as possible.
And specifically,
when we see the strategies that help women to survive in this hostile or at least unfriendly environment
we see age-related strategies such as adjusting behavior or adjusting looks,
we have already seen some of those issues before.
Studies which are related to gender,
ranging from don't taking things personally or baking other women,
those strategies which are trying to combine age - gender,
because again we know that strategies are not always easily attributed to a single of those dimensions.
And here you see two recommendations we have distilled from our interviews.
For example,
trying to help the next generation of women and non-binary people
and of course also benefiting from the networks.
So summarizing,
what have we seen?
We have seen that both organizations and individuals should and can invest in creating more welcoming environment
for all the developers in general and for veteran women developers in particular.
Of course,
it is a matter of common knowledge by now that diversity can bring more creative solutions and can create more productive teams
but specifically when we are talking about minoritized groups -
specifically when we are talking about groups which are so scarce as older women and non-binary people in software development -
their inclusion allows us to approach the needs of the underpresented - underserved groups in the society as a whole.
Examples of this kind of adjustments are of course changes in the interview process,
offering returnships,
including KPIs or including statements which would be refer - reflect that contributions of those people are valued
and are important for the company.
When it comes to individual developers,
then of course we have quite a number of challenges there,
because we see people changing - challenging the environment or changing their environments.
Either, for example, through things like unionization, standing up against biases,
or simply by changing companies, roles, or sometimes locations.
We also see many much more problematic techniques and strategies,
such as adopting useful patterns of behavior,
changing looks,
changing - sorry, okay,
changing how people behave and how people look,
but of course at the same time,
we know that those are merely band-aid solutions,
while of course the problems are sometimes  - or at least most of them are systemic.
And I apologize,
something happened to my screen and i'm not sure what exactly you are seeing.
We are seeing you at the moment the screen share has ended.
We've got - we've got time if you've got another slide or two and would like to try to reshare your screen that should work.
Okay,
let me just try to share it.
Sure, yep, we're seeing your screen but not your slides.
Okay, so now you need to see the slides.
Yeah I know we're seeing the slides.
Thank you.
So that's essentially this time,
yes,
so as I said, right, so we have strategies and solutions which can help people
and you can help both companies and both companies and individuals should be engaged in this process.
And now I can actually stop sharing.
Okay, thank you very much,
sorry for the technical hiccup there.
Great talk - thank you Alexander.
A question coming in from the audience.
How is all of this going to play out with the demographic shift we're seeing, for example, in Japan and parts of Europe,
as we have an aging population.
Do you think that this sort of discrimination is going to be reduced?
I would love to say yes,
but I don't really see it happening.
Our study has of course focused on the US-based labor market which is more hot, more active,
than what at least I see here in Europe,
and I probably should not make any comments about the Japanese labor market.
I'm mostly worried that, like, the problems we see are mostly related to changing employment.
If people are sticking around to the same companies,
they might be suffering but they will still around,
so they are not going to see it.
The problems which came up were mostly related to finding companies,
being hired by those companies, and so on.
If the market is not that active, people are not likely to change their employment,
so we might have other forms of discrimination rather than the one we have seen.
But it will be very bold for me to claim that we are not going to have any forms of discrimination.
Okay,
another another comment that came up - or question -
you mentioned changing appearance
How common is that in the tech sector, and how often are you seeing people taking advantage of remote work
to try to play down or even conceal their age?
So as a scientist I should say that those studies were qualitative,
so I cannot answer questions on the quantitative side,
I don't know how often it happens,
but it has been repeatedly mentioned at the very least.
So our interviewees are repeatedly mentioning changing their appearance,
either to appear younger or on the other side to not appear younger.
So most of the time when we are talking about changing appearance we are thinking about trying to appear younger.
Some people are not trying to appear younger,
in particular this was one of the topics which was related to our interviews with women.
I can maybe quote one of the interviewees,
she said that all those young tech bros,
they don't like to work with their mom but they are perfectly happy working with their grandmother.
So, this age, you know,
it has a very strange relationship with what makes you "of the right age".
Women are often seen as never being right -
either to young and not taken seriously because they're too young
or they're too old and not taken seriously because their knowledge is our date,
right,
so this - it's a tightrope.
